Update extending-learners section (#388)
mlr-org/mlr3book: book/07-extending-learners.qmd

library(mlr3book)
```

> Although many learners are already included in the mlr3verse, there might be a situation in which your algorithm of choice is not implemented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although many learners are already included in the `r mlr_pkg("mlr3verse"), there might be a situation in which your algorithm of choice is not implemented.
```

I think we don't say "mlr3verse" when we talk about the ecosystem in general, probably better to just say "mlr3" or more specifically "mlr3learners".

Author: will replace by mlr3 ecosystem

Here, we show how to create a custom mlr3learner step-by-step using `r ref("mlr3extralearners::create_learner")`.

> If you think the learner will be useful to others as well, you can consider creating a pull request in the [mlr3extralearners](https://github.com/mlr-org/mlr3extralearners) repository.

Reviewer: I think this sentence can be left out, every learner has an added value to multiple people and the decision should also not be moved to potential contributors.

Author: agree

> If you intend to add a learner to mlr3extralearners, **it is strongly recommended** that you **first** open a [learner request issue](https://github.com/mlr-org/mlr3extralearners/issues/new?assignees=&labels=new+learner&template=learner-request-template.md&title=%5BLRNRQ%5D+Add+%3Calgorithm%3E+from+package+%3Cpackage%3E) to discuss the learner you want to implement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you intend to add a learner to mlr3extralearners, **it is strongly recommended** to **first** open a [learner request issue](https://github.com/mlr-org/mlr3extralearners/issues/new?assignees=&labels=new+learner&template=learner-request-template.md&title=%5BLRNRQ%5D+Add+%3Calgorithm%3E+from+package+%3Cpackage%3E) to inform the `r mlr_pkg("mlr3")` team about your idea.
```

Watch pkg formatting.

Author: agree

> This allows us to discuss the purpose and necessity of the learner before you start to put the real work in!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows to discuss the implementation details and potential peculiarities of the learner before putting actual work in.
```

Author: agree

> Note that some of the steps shown are only applicable in case you plan on creating a pull request to the mlr-org.

Reviewer: This should be obvious, everyone can do whatever they want in their own private repos. Would just leave this sentence out.

Author: agree

See the [Learner FAQ subsection](#learner-faq) for help.

**Summary of steps for adding a new learner**

1. Check the learner does not already exist [here](https://mlr3extralearners.mlr-org.com/articles/learners/list_learners.html).
2. [Fork, clone and load](#setup) `r mlr3book::mlr_pkg("mlr3extralearners")`.
1. Check that the learner does not already exist [here](https://mlr3extralearners.mlr-org.com/articles/learners/list_learners.html).
2. [Install](#setup) `r mlr3book::mlr_pkg("mlr3extralearners")` and if you want to create a PR, also [fork and clone](#setup) it.
3. [Run](#create-learner) `r ref("mlr3extralearners::create_learner()")`.
4. Add the learner [`param_set`](#param-set).
4. Add the learner's [`param_set`](#param-set).
5. Manually add [`.train`](#learner-train) and [`.predict`](#learner-predict) private methods to the learner.
6. If applicable add `importance` and `oob_error` public methods to the learner.
7. If applicable add references to the learner.
8. Check [unit tests](#learner-test) and [paramtests](#learner-test) pass (these are automatically created).
9. Run [cleaning functions](#cleaning)

> 10. Open a [pull request](https://github.com/mlr-org/mlr3extralearners/pulls) with the new learner template.

Reviewer: Just use 1. in enumerations

Author: done

> 6. If the learner has the property

Reviewer: It would help to explain here how these properties can be determined in a learner (it's not always obvious).

Author: I added a little more information in the linked section

>    More information on those methods can be found [here](#other-methods).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   More information about these methods can be found [in section "other methods"](#other-methods).
```

Maybe rename section name?

Author: Renamed the section to "Optional Extractors" (like in the mlr3 manual) and created a own section for hotstarting.

7. Fill out the missing parts in the learner's description.

> To add references you first need to create an entry in bibentries.R

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   To add references you first need to create an entry in bibentries.R
```

Author: done

8. Check [unit tests](#learner-test) and [parameter tests](#learner-test) pass (these are automatically created).
9. Run [cleaning functions](#cleaning)
10. Open a [pull request](https://github.com/mlr-org/mlr3extralearners/pulls) with the "new learner" template.

:::{.callout-warning}

> Do not copy/paste the code shown in this section. Use `r ref("create_learner()")` to start.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Do not copy/paste the code shown in this section.
Use `r ref("create_learner()")` to start.
```

Author: done

:::

## Setting-up mlr3extralearners {#setup}

> In order to use the `r ref("mlr3extralearners::create_learner")` function you must have mlr3extralearners installed.

Reviewer: You can often just write "in order to use <function name>, [...]" without "the" and "function" within the sentence.

This should be obvious in general - I'd just leave it out.

1. `caller = "rpart"` - This tells the `.train` function, and the description which function is called to run the algorithm, with `package` this automatically fills `rpart::rpart`.
1. `feature_types = c("logical", "integer", "numeric", "factor", "ordered")` - Sets the type of features that can be handled by the learner. See [meta information](#learner-meta-information).
1. `predict_types = c("response", "prob"),` - Sets the possible prediction types as response (pointwise prediction) and prob (probabilities). See [meta information](#learner-meta-information).
1. `properties = c("importance", "missings", "multiclass", "selected_features", "twoclass", "weights")` - Sets the properties that are handled by the learner.
By including `"importance"` a public method called `importance` will be created that must be manually filled.
See [meta information](#learner-meta-information).
1. `gh_name = "RaphaelS1"` - Fills the "author" tag with my GitHub handle, this is required as it identifies the maintainer of the learner.

> The sections below demonstrate what happens after the function has been run and the files that are created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The sections below show an exemplary execution of `r ref("mlr3extralearners::create_learner")`.
```

## `learner_package_type_key.R`

> The first script to complete after running `r ref("create_learner()")` is the file with the form `learner_package_type_key.R`, in our case this will actually be `learner_rpart_classif_rpart.R`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first generated file which must be updated after running `r ref("create_learner()")` is the one following the structure `learner_<package>_<type>_<key>.R`; in this example `learner_rpart_classif_rpart.R`.
```

#' @author RaphaelS1
#' @name mlr_learners_classif.rpart
#'
#' @description
#' <FIXME> BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE LEARNER.
#' Calls [rpart::rpart()] from <FIXME> (CRAN VS NO CRAN): \CRANpkg{rpart} | 'rpart'.
#'
#' @section Custom mlr3 defaults:
#' <FIXME> DEVIATIONS FROM UPSTREAM PARAMETERS. DELETE IF NOT APPLICABLE.
#'
#' @section Custom mlr3 defaults:

> #' <FIXME> DEVIATIONS FROM UPSTREAM DEFAULTS. DELETE IF NOT APPLICABLE.

Reviewer: `<FIXME>` is ok, many editors highlight fixmes when using `FIXME:` (including the colon).

Author: Yes would be better, but will keep it like that for now

Author: ok I changed it

#'
#' @section Installation:

> #' <FIXME> IF THERE ARE IMPORTANT INSTALLATION INSTRUCTIONS ADD THEM HERE AND DELETE OTHERWISE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#' <FIXME> IF THERE ARE IMPORTANT INSTALLATION INSTRUCTIONS ADD THEM HERE. DELETE IF NOT APPLICABLE.
```

    If this property is set, you must also implement a public method `importance()` to retrieve the importance values from the model.
  * `"selected_features"`: The learner supports extracting the features which were selected by the model.
    If this property is set, you must also implement a public method `selected_features()` to retrieve the set of used features from the model.
  * `"oob_error"`: The learner supports extracting the out of bag error.
    If this property is set, you must also implement a public method `oob_error()` to retrieve the out of bag error from the model.
  * `"loglik"`: The learner supports extracting the log-likelihood of the learner.
    If this property is set, you must also implement a public method `loglik()` to retrieve the log-likelihood from the trained model.
  * `"hotstart_forward"`: The learner allows to continue training the model e.g. by adding more trees to a random forest.
    If this property is set, you must also implement a private method `.hotstart()`.
  * `"hotstart_backward"`: The learner allows to "undo" some of the training, e.g. by removing some trees from a model.

>     If this property is set, you must also implement a private method `.hotstart()`.

Reviewer: duplicated

Author: removed it from the instructions in the beginning

* `"keep_model"` is logical with a default of `FALSE` and is used during `"train"`.

In some rare cases you may want to change the default parameter values.
You can do this by changing the `param_set$values`.

> You can see we have done this for `"classif.rpart"` where the default for `xval` is changed to `0`. Note that the default in the `r ref("ParamSet")` is recorded as our changed default (0), and not the original (10).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can see we have done this for `"classif.rpart"` where the default for `xval` is changed to `0`.
Note that the default in the `r ref("ParamSet")` is recorded as our changed default (0), and not the original (10).
```

Author: done

```

We need to pass the formula notation `Species ~ .`, the data and the hyperparameters.

> To get the hyperparameters, we call `self$param_set$get_values()` and query all parameters that are using during `"train"`. Then, the dataset is extracted from the `r ref("Task")`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get the hyperparameters, we call `self$param_set$get_values()` and query all parameters that are using during `"train"`.
Then, the dataset is extracted from the `r ref("Task")`.
```

  # get newdata and ensure same ordering in train and predict
  newdata = task$data(cols = self$state$feature_names)
  if (self$predict_type == "response") {
    response = invoke(
      predict,
      self$model,
      newdata = newdata,
      type = "class",
      .args = pars
    )

    return(list(response = response))
  } else {
    prob = invoke(
      predict,
      self$model,
      newdata = newdata,
      type = "prob",
      .args = pars
    )
    return(list(prob = prob))
  }
}
```

:::{.callout-warning}

> You cannot rely on the column order of the data returned by `task$data()` as the order of columns may be different from the order of the columns during `$.train`. The `newdata` line ensures the ordering is the same by calling the saved order set in `$.train`, don't delete either of these lines!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You cannot rely on the column order of the data returned by `task$data()` as the order of columns may be different from the order of the columns during `$.train`.
The `newdata` line ensures the ordering is the same by calling the saved order set in `$.train` - don't delete either of these lines!
```

As mentioned above, some methods only have to be implemented when the learner the property.
The blueprint for these methods is only included in the generate learner template, if the property is set when calling `create_learner()`.
The comments in the templates will include references to other learners that have this property and can be used as a reference.

The following methods are possible:

* `importance` - Must return a named numeric vector, where the names are the features and the values the corresponding sorted importance score.
* `selected_features` - Must return a character vector containing the features that were selected during training.
* `loglik` - Must return the log-likelihood of the model.
* `oob_error` - Must return the out of bag error of the model.
* `.hotstart` - Depending on whether the learner has the property `"hotstart_forward"` or `"hotstart_backward"`, this should undo some of the training in the model or continue training the already trained model with respect to a specific parameter, for example the number of trees or gradient steps.
  All other parameters are assumed to be constant.
  See `r ref("HotstartStack")` for more information.

> 

Reviewer: remove line

Author: done

In this case, we only have to implement the `importance()` method.

> 

Reviewer: remove lines

To ensure that your learner is able to handle all kinds of different properties and feature types, we have written an "autotest" that checks the learner for different combinations of such.

> The "autotest" setup is generated automatically by `r ref("create_learner()")` and will open after running the function, it will have a name with the form `test_package_type_key.R`, in our case this will actually be `test_rpart_classif_rpart.R`. In our example this will create the following script, for which no changes are required to pass (assuming the learner was correctly created):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "autotest" setup is generated automatically by `r ref("create_learner()")` and will open after running the function.
It will have a name with the form `test_<package>_<type>_<key>.R`, in this example `test_rpart_classif_rpart.R`.
This will create the following script, for which no modifications are required (assuming the learner was correctly created):
```

In addition, if the maintainer of the upstream package changes something with respect to the arguments of the algorithm, the learner is in danger to break.
Also, new arguments could be added upstream and manually checking for new additions all the time is tedious.

> Therefore we have written a "Parameter Check" that runs regularly for every learner. This "Parameter Check" compares the parameters of the `r mlr3book::mlr_pkg("mlr3")` ParamSet against all arguments available in the upstream function that is called during `$train()` and `$predict()`. Again the file is automatically created and opened by `r ref("create_learner()")`, this will be named like `test_paramtest_package_type_key.R`, so in our example `test_paramtest_rpart_classif_rpart.R`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore we have written a "Parameter Check" that runs regularly for every learner. This "Parameter Check" compares the parameters of the `r mlr3book::mlr_pkg("mlr3")` ParamSet against all arguments available in the upstream function that is called during `$train()` and `$predict()`.
Again the file is automatically created and opened by `r ref("create_learner()")`, this will be named like `test_paramtest_package_type_key.R`, so in our example `test_paramtest_rpart_classif_rpart.R`.
```

I am reading this the third time now - should we reduce redundancies?

Author: I think it's fine

Reviewer: The Q was rethorical, I think we should not repeat this phrase so often here as it gives a bit the feeling of a partially c/p article content.

Reviewer: But it's not a blocker for me, your choice. Just wanted to clarifuy my intentions :)

When the `.train` function calls multiple functions (e.g. a control function as described above), a list of functions can be passed to the parameter test.

> The test comes with an `exclude` argument that should be used to _exclude and explain_ why certain arguments of the upstream function are not within the ParamSet of the mlr3learner. This will likely be required for all learners as common arguments like `x`, `target` or `data` are handled by the `r mlr3book::mlr_pkg("mlr3")` interface and are therefore not included within the ParamSet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The test comes with an `exclude` argument that should be used to _exclude and explain_ why certain arguments of the upstream function are not within the ParamSet of the mlr3learner.
This will likely be required for all learners as common arguments like `x`, `target` or `data` are handled by the `r mlr3book::mlr_pkg("mlr3")` interface and are therefore not included within the ParamSet.
```

- The upstream function cannot be run without setting this parameter, i.e. it would throw an error.
- The parameter has no default in the upstream function.

> In `r mlr3book::mlr_pkg("mlr3") ` we follow the principle that every learner should be constructable without setting custom parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In `r mlr3book::mlr_pkg("mlr3")` we follow the principle that every learner should be constructable without setting custom parameters.
```
